# Longitudinal Breast Cancer Recurrence Prediction

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;According to the World Cancer Research Fund, breast cancer is the most common cancer in women with over 2 million new cases in 2018. With an estimated 626,700 breast cancer deaths worldwide in 2018 and 41,760 in the US in 2019, it is a leading cause of cancer death. For those successfully treated, there is an almost 30% probability of recurrence of which, only 1-1.5% are potentially curable. To increase curability, studies show that early detection of asymptomatic breast cancer recurrence improves survival compared to later de-tection of symptomatic disease. With only 40% of recurrences asymptomatic at the time of detection, the question remains how to improve long-term recurrence surveillance which suffers from lack of standardization, patient heterogeneity, and the inability to predict recurrences ahead of time. My project presents the first at-tempt to predict breast cancer recurrence, 1 year in advance, by leveraging unstructured clinical narratives in EHR (electronic health records) over a patient’s temporal visit sequence. Advantages of EHR include its wide-spread adoption (more than 95% of hospitals possess an EHR), usage (94% of hospitals use EHR data to inform clinical practice), non-invasive nature, and ability to capture data over time. 
<br><br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I first develop robust, encoded representations of the unstructured clinical narratives. This is done through text preprocessing in which notes are standardized, noise is eliminated, and semantic meaning is preserved. Next, I train unsupervised word2vec embeddings across a corpus of ~100 millions notes from 3 institutions for increased generalization. Finally, robust document-level embeddings are computed as an average of word vectors for all words in the document weighted via TF-IDF. Using the document-level embeddings, I then train an LSTM RNN for longitudinal recurrence prediction. The model architecture consists of a 1-directional, many-to-many, stacked stateful LSTM RNN with 2 stacked LSTM layers and a total of ~78K trainable parameters. This model was validated via 5-fold cross validation, trained, and tested on ~154K actual notes from 940 dis-tinct patients broken up into a 75% training set and 25% test set. Finally, these predictions are visualized on a temporal graph to help clinicians understand the model and use its predictions in assessment and treatment planning. 
<br><br>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In conclusion, my model is the first attempt to use clinical narratives to perform longitudinal breast cancer re-currence prediction, 1 year ahead of time, achieving 0.841 ROC AUC, 0.817 specificity, and 0.716 sensitivity on the hold-out test set. Temporal analysis of the model’s performance demonstrates increased performance over time as well as the model’s ability to handle longitudinal data and retain important information from the past to aid in future predictions. The model’s comprehensive, fully automated analysis of unstructured clinical narratives can also be generalized to other types of cancers and diseases to offer key insight into future clini-cal events. Unlike previous “black-box” models, my model can be visualized, engendering trust in clinicians to leverage and utilize its personalized predictions as a pivotal part in determining adequate treatment. This al-lows clinicians to improve patient survival by treating recurrences earlier and even preventing them from occur-ring in the first place. 
